---
layout: post
title: Amazon, Interest Rates, and the Stock Market
categories: [economics, finance]
tags: [economics, finance]
#fullview: true
comments: true
---

I figured I would write another post since the stock market has really been going on a roller coaster the past couple of days. The events I talked about in my last post are starting to take place, and we might be headed for a full blown recession. The bond yields continue to rise pushing, putting greater strain on the economy as a whole, but particularly the stock market. I predict we may reach 3% 10 year yields soon which would wreck havok. Meanwhile, the dollar index looks poised to sink lower as its possible that the Fed needs to raise their rate target more aggressively. THAT will be the sinking point. Sure, the stock market is poised for a correction. I don't think anyone would deny that. But the recession could be much worse than a stock market crash. The problem will come from how the Fed reacts to the stock market crash. I believe they wont do the right thing, and attempt to lower interest rates yet again to zero and do more quantitative easing. And if they do that, the dollar will get CRUSHED.

But this is worst case scenario.

Hopefully, the Fed will keep raising rates, and maybe even faster. This WILL cause a stock market crash, and slow our economy tremendously. However, rates will go up regardless of what they do. Bond yields can't stay so low if we want to continue to finance our deficits. This will also crush the bond market. However, if bond yields go up, the US government will definitely not be able to pay back the higher yields anyway. The big daddy I talked about in my last post is that people don't want our bonds anymore, and its palpable.

The bottom line to all this is, either we have a dollar crisis with rampant inflation, or we have a slowed economy from correct monetary policy. People WILL lose their jobs, people WILL lose money. There's no way around this.

Now, this is just a theory. In order to make safe financial investments, it is better to make more conservative investing decisions. I will try to do that in this post. Namely, I want to look into how higher interest rates will affect certain companies.

I thought about this the other day: I had always heard that Amazon's business model was to essentially undercut competitor's prices and gain market share at the expense of profits. How do they do this, while still growing? The answer to this is they finance with debt.

If this is true, then higher interest rates should have a very negative effect on Amazon. Paying higher interest on their bonds would mean they would have to raise prices to account for this loss, which might make them less competitive compared to other companies that are more interested in the short term bottom line. And who knows, maybe the only reason Amazon is so successful is because the customers expect a certain price. If this goes up, what if no one wants to shop on Amazon anymore? Personally, I probably still would, up to a point, just because 2 day shipping is so damn convenient. But the question isn't so much whether or not I think Amazon will fail because of this. I think you would have to be a fool to think that. It's whether or not one should short Amazon.

Amazon is a good company. But whether or not you believe this, you HAVE to believe it's a bubble. I mean, the P/E ratio as of today is 219.02. Yes. 219.02. That is absurd. Compare that to Walmart's 26. And that 219.02 is calculated AFTER Amazon dropped almost 5% to $1350. Forward P/E is projected to be 93.72, clearly leaving much room downwards. BTW, I'm getting this info very easily from here

https://finviz.com/quote.ashx?t=AMZN

Great website. If you look at the chart you can see there has clearly been a meteoric rise that mimics that of the S&P since November. Smells like a bubble, looks like a bubble. Probably overvalued just looking at the technicals.

But lets not look at the technicals. Lets look at the fundamentals.

Now my suspicion that they heavily finance with debt was only partially true. If you look at their 10K for 2017, which shows 2016 numbers for comparison, they didn't do much long term debt financing in 2016. They did have quite a bit of additional paid in capital on the equity side which shows investors are very much interested in getting some of the action. But this shouldn't change much when interest rates go up. However, I was partially right because in 2017, they issued $17 billion in bonds to finance their acquisition of Whole Foods.

However, interest rates also shouldn't affect these bonds (at least to Amazon directly), because the loan payments are amortized and are apparently fixed rate, smart.

So the moral of the story is, Amazon does not rely on debt for day to day operations. However, what it does show is that Amazon might depend on debt for any serious expansion of their business, because they make very little profit for a company of their size.

This makes it hard for me to make a call. Long or short. If I'm talking to a retiree, don't touch it with a 10ft pole. It's historically very volatile, and will only get more volatile. If I'm talking to a youngin' like myself? I say short, but only because it really wouldn't be a horrible idea to short the whole market at this point, if you like a nice amount of risk. However, in the absence of a market wide correction, it would be hard to say long or short, because I also think Amazon has a lot of room to grow with their new Whole Foods acquisition and hasn't even begun to tap into that power. But at the same time, it looks like the market could have already priced that into the price. From my layman point of view, it looks like a lot of hype, with a lot of analysts saying it will go up as high as $1800 from here. So ultimately I'm not gonna make a call on Amazon.

Regardless of where the market goes in the coming months, I think it would be nice to play around with a small small sum of money in the VXX, or volatility index. It's already appreciated by more than 100% since January so it might already be high enough, but I think this market could get even more volatile. This is more for the day traders out there.

Well, anyway, since my Amazon investigation was a fluke, it got me thinking. What other companies do rely to a large degree on debt? Finviz makes this easy with its stock screener. Just look at the companies with the highest debt/equity ratios and see who's really levered up. I sorted by over 1 ( the highest Finviz will let you go if you're a non paying member) and it seemed like everyone had at least this amount of debt (lol). Well then, I also sorted by high P/E ratios to see if there was overvaluation, long-term debt-equity over 1, and price to free cash flow over 100. I did this last one because a low free cash flow and high debt would mean depending heavily on debt.

This narrowed it down to around 5 stocks in the US and one was CoreSite Realty Corp. These guys are actually a Real Estate Investment Trust (REIT), but they are acquiring real estate to make data centers which is their ultimate business model. This makes sense that they haven't made much money yet, as they're probably investing heavily and building infrastructure. Looking at other REIT's, it seems that there isn't a real defining P/E ratio for the industry, they're all over the place. COR's P/E is 52.35, and a debt/equity and long term debt/equity of 2.70. It's price to free cash flow is 127.12.

Now let's look at the 10K. The most important section is looking at the debt structure. Unlike AMZN, COR's debt has a variable interest rate that resets every year. Looking at the statement of operations, the interest expense increased around 100% from 2016 to 2017, whereas from 2015 to 2016 it only increased by about 50%. This seems like it would be due to the interest rate hikes in 2017, and keep in mind they weren't even that much. As interest rates increase, this interest expense will continue to increase and further drain the company. Now, how much will interest rates increase? Who knows. But I think it will have to go up quite a bit. COR has already decreased from 110 to 95 recently, so it has already taken a hit from this recent correction.

Anyway, this whole post has me thinking about a good candidate for another algorithm. Use interest rate changes as a trading signal. On interest rate increases, short the top x companies in terms of debt/equity, LT debt/equity, P/E and P/FCF, and on interest rate decreases, do the opposite. I'll probably write my next post after backtesting this strategy on quantopian. For the record, I normally use zipline, the open source backtester that quantopian uses and run it locally on my machine because its much faster. However the most recent master branches of zipline have not been totally functional and are very buggy, so I've resorted to using and running backtests on the quantopian website.
