---
layout: post
title: Gold and Bitcoin
categories: [finance]
tags: [finance]
description: Are they correlated?
---

This is an interesting thought I had the other day concerning the US Economy. If you don't know, Gold has been money for the majority of human history, and for a good reason. Gold fits a lot of the necessary requirements for money. It is rare, indestructible, and has intrinsic value. Some people like to poke fun at gold because they don't see the actual use of it. Isn't it just used for jewelry? Who cares? I know I don't care about jewelry. Is it really much different from fiat currency if the only reason people value it is because they think gold has value?

Well no, because gold is a metal with intrinsic properties that no other metals share. It is a precious metal, like silver, paladium, platinum, steel, etc. It has its own characteristic atomic properties with 79 protons and atomic weight of 197. This gives it all sorts of properties, many of which have real life uses. A big usage of gold, for example, is in electronics, because it is an excellent conductor, inert, and non corrosive. And the reason why it is adopted in electronics, is because you don't need much gold in microchips. This is because there just isn't that much gold in the world. I remember reading somewhere that all the worlds gold reserves can be fit in one Olympic sized swimming pool. However, this doesn't mean that gold couldn't be used in certain situations, preferable to other metals. Like perhaps a golden car. However, this is prohibitively expensive due to the low supply of gold. Also, we need that gold to stay in vaults to be used as money!

The fact that it isn't used in all sorts of applications (although it actually is see: dentistry, jewelry, electronics, medicine, space travel, etc.) doesn't mean it isn't useful for those applications. It is intrinsically very valuable, because you can do things with your gold.

The only downside to gold is that it is hard to pay for juicy fruit with gold. Weighing out gold in discrete amounts small enough for real world transactions sucks. That's what federal reserve notes used to be in the US. You see, federal reserve notes weren't just pieces of paper. They were denominated in gold, and for all intents and purposes, they were gold. They were gold IOU tokens. But then we had the bright idea to get off of that so that we could print money at our will the save us from the horrible woes of the capitalist business cycle (sarcasm). I don't want to get into that too much because that will be for another post.

However, this downside can be mitigated, with companies like GoldMoney, and even goldmint.io. GoldMoney as a company gives you fiat currency to spend based on how much gold you hold with their company, and goldmint.io in the same vein is trying to create a cryptocurrency "token" that will be backed by gold (this is very interesting, but ultimately I think stupid). And of course, if the US government decided to go back to a gold standard, that would be preferable.

Now, compare gold to bitcoin.

When bitcoin was first created, it was supposed to be used as currency. The whole idea was to replace fiat currency with money for the people, by the people. It cannot be influenced by any one body, such as the Federal Reserve, and all transactions have to be verified by a crowd sourced network. Of course, the initial conditions of the network have to be arbitrarily set by a single body, but after it is set in motion they would have limited control. However, it has shown to not be super great at this. For one, it ISN'T used as currency. People that accept bitcoin, rarely ever accept the bitcoin and hold on to it. This is for the weird culty bitcoin people. Most sane business people will take the bitcoin and immediately cash it into fiat currency, or at least at some point want fiat currency. Because really, there is very little trust in the general public of an asset so ridiculously volatile like bitcoin, or any cryptocurrency. You have way more freedom with your fiat currency. On top of this, and the number 1 reason why I (surprise) don't like bitcoin or cryptocurrency's in general, is that it has no intrinsic value. It only has value because other people might think it has value. And in this way it has more in common with fiat currency than it likes to admit.

On top of this, bitcoin (not all crypto's) can no longer be used as a currency. And bitcoin adopters admit this. It is too slow, and transaction fees are too high to buy pizza or juicy fruit. Now, they say that it is a digital asset, it is digital gold. What's funny is a lot of the libertarians that are on board with the idea of abolish the fed, laissez faire capitalism that hate a centrally run economy and were the true believers in bitcoin should like gold. But they like bitcoin, because of its decentralized aspect. BUT IT HAS NO INTRINSIC VALUE. And that is why I could and will never be on board with a cryptocurrency. That, and also I don't like the idea of my money being able to be destroyed by a magnetic field.

And most the time I lay these accusations against crypto's, the first response will be "Well yeah, but that's the same with fiat currency". Right. We don't like fiat currency either. And it has a lot of problems, specifically that were the cause of the bubbles of 2000, 2008, and probably other's before it. People have become too used to fiat currency, to all our money being in the form of digital bits being sent to and from federal reserve computers from bank to bank. To bank and check transactions just being the exchange of federal reserves. And with this complacency and trust in our government, it makes people forget what money really is.

Anyway, the other day when there was some bond market scare, and right around when the DOW reached an all time high, there was a quick little correction that took place and gold made a quick rise up (and gold miner stocks), which at the same time bitcoin took a huge hit. Now, these might not be related, since bitcoin had some other South Korea news and such, but it got me thinking.

Are Gold and Bitcoin related?

Real gold, vs. digital gold. Do people truly see bitcoin as a "safe haven" asset? My hypothesis is, no. It is a highly speculative asset, much different from the way gold is seen. But I wanted to make a quick little test of this, to see if they were at least correlated or anti correlated.

For this I used python, numpy, pandas, and matplotlib and a jupyter notebook to show my work a little easier. The data was taken from the quandl datasets of the London Bullion Market for Gold and BitStamp exchange for bitcoin.

It's really simple. All I did was find the covariance between the two assets. I made a couple of alterations.


Now obviously, this is pretty rudimentary and I'm sure any economist or statistician would be yelling at their screens right now at how many incorrect assumptions I've made in this, but it is kind of interesting. When comparing the entirety of bitcoins lifetime, there is a negative covariance, meaning that when gold goes up, bitcoin goes down and vice versa. A possible explanation for this is that in its early stages, bitcoin was actually far more volatile and seen as the opposite of a safe haven asset, much like the OG peeps said. That it was supposed to be a digital currency, not digital gold. But when taking into account the past year, there is a positive covariance, which shows that maybe there is some correlation with gold prices. Maybe it is being seen more as "digital gold". As people lose faith in the US dollar, could bitcoin be pumped with more money in some sort of currency crisis? Or will gold hold out as the safe haven asset? As the dollar strengthens, will bitcoin move the opposite direction, or do bitcoin inventors really not care about such trivial things as "the economy"? I think for another post, I should explore the relationship between inflation as measured by the CPI and gold and bitcoin, to get a better sense of how the US dollar fits into all this.
