---
layout: post
title: Using Lennard-Jones Pairwise Potential to Generate Energy Profile of Macromolecule
categories: [computer-science, science]
tags: [computer-science, science]
---
This topic relates to computational biochemistry, and it helps in drug discovery. In a basic sense, the way drug companies come up with leads for compounds to use as drugs is they find a receptor site of interest somewhere that leads to a certain cell response that they want, and they target it. This means they have to find compounds that will bind to this receptor site and start the signal cascade. They can save a lot of time and money to narrow down these candidates by using computers to simulate the binding of compounds.

As part of my research this past summer, I used structures from the protein data bank, aptly named PDB files in PDB format, and, broadly, sought to make these structures more accurate. You see, we get data about the locations of atoms of proteins and ligands via x-ray crystallography, and this can only be so accurate. It also can only be so precise, determined by its resolution. However, x-ray crystallography can generate relatively high resolution images compared to other methods. But the ultimate pdb models are not the raw diffraction data of the crystals. Rather, they are models built by the crystallographers, and they are not perfect. Because of this, there is need to make more accurate models, since more accurate models will lead to more accurate simulations and more accurate drug discovery.

The most important factor for a more accurate model is to have the lowest possible global energy. All physical systems tend towards the lowest amount of energy possible as it is the most stable. However, sometimes while the global energy will be low, there will be pockets of high energy that are big no no's. Sometimes there will be steric clashes, or atoms that are too close for comfort in the eyes of Van Der Waals. If we could target these local pockets of high energy for refinement, we could get a much better model.

For this, there are many different ways to calculate energy. There is traditional physics Coulomb potential, there is the Lennard Jones potential, and then some other implicit solvent models that take into account the solvent (usually water). However, admittedly, those are much less trivial to code, so I stuck with some simpler Coulomb and LJ potentials. These equations are given by

$$U(r) = k \frac{qQ}{r}$$

For Coulomb, where k is a constant, q and Q are the charges of both the atoms and r is the distance between them, and

$$V_{LJ} = 4 \epsilon ((\frac{A}{r})^{12} - (\frac{B}{r})^{6})$$

For Lennard Jones, where 4 epsilon is also a constant, A and B are empirical constants for each atom, and r is the distance between them.

One can do a pairwise potential for each atom-atom pair and find an energy profile of these atoms.


This is a heatmap visually showing this for a random problematic model form the PDB, 1AB4. The yellow points show high energy hot spots, where the highest energies obviously lie along the diagonal, where the atoms will naturally be close to each other (atom #1500 is very close to atom #1501, for example).

Once you have a snapshot of the macromolecule, there should be some way to target the high energy points. Typically, there are two ways to refine a molecule. One way is with molecular dynamics. This is basically using newtons methods to minimize a function representing the energy of the atoms. For example, if you only use the lennard jones potential for two atoms, finding the minimal energy of the system would require finding the derivative of the LJ potential and using a small step in a direction that lowers the energy, and repeat until you start to converge at a pocket of low energy. However, for high dimensional systems this is very slow, and can only run for a very short amount of time. It also can get stuck in local optima, while missing out on global optima. There are some algorithms that re-mediate this, such as simulated annealing.

There are also Monte Carlo methods, which are very popular. These basically require you to randomly sample the search space. In this case, the search space is the space of possible movements of the atoms. So the atoms can rotate along their bonds (think spherical coordinates). Even with just polar coordinates, if you have a 3000 atoms long protein you have a very high dimensional search space. Monte Carlo helps with the computational expensiveness of this system (in molecular dynamics) by just doing random sampling using a random number generator. This would be a naive approach and not very good. A more intelligent way to go about it would be to draw from some sort of probability distribution. This is where I believe this energy profile could come into play. Creating a probability distribution that more heavily favors the high energy pockets could maybe help fix some of the bad apples. Then, you could draw from this probability distribution and use a markov chain monte carlo approach (didn't explain markov chain monte carlo, but you can read up on that if you want).
